English_1


Match the words with their definitions:
 1) cipher (n.) also cypher
['saɪfə]
a) present, appearing, or found every- where
 2) non-volatile (adj.)
[nɔn'vɔlətaɪl]
b) a tube with a nozzle and piston or bulb for sucking in and ejecting liquid in a thin stream
3) inefficient (adj.)
[ˌɪnɪ'fɪʃ(ə)nt]
c)taking up much space, typically incon- veniently; large and unwieldy
 
4) bulky (adj.)
['bʌlkɪ]
d)an annual calendar containing im- portant dates and statistical information such as astronomical data and tide tables
5) domain (n.)
[dəu'meɪn]
e)a table or device designed to assist with calculation
6) almanac (n.)
['ɔːlmənæk]
f)not achieving maximum productivity; wasting or failing to make the best use of time or resources
7) abacus (n.)
['abəkəs]
g)unreasonably high
 
8) operand (n.)
['ɔpər(ə)nd]
h)retaining data even if there is a break in the power supply
9) exorbitant (adj.)
[ɪg'zɔːbɪt(ə)nt]
i)a simple device for calculating, consist- ing of a frame with rows of wires or grooves along which beads are slid
10) syringe (n.)
[sɪ'rɪnʤ]
 j)write-protected
 11) reckoner (n.)
['rek(ə)nə]
k) an area of territory owned or controlled by a ruler or government
12) read-only (adj.)
[ri:dəunli]
l) the quantity on which an operation is to be done
 
 13) ubiquitous (adj.)
[juː'bɪkwɪtəs
m)a secret or disguised way of writing; a code






HARDWARE HISTORY OVERVIEW
The first computers were people. That is, electronic computers (and the ear- lier mechanical computers) were given this name because they performed the work that had previously been assigned to people. "Computer" was originally a job title: it was used to describe those human beings (predominantly women) whose job it was to perform the repetitive calculations required to compute such things as navigational tables, tide charts, and planetary positions for astronomical almanacs. Imagine you had a job where hour after hour, day after day, you were to
do nothing but compute multiplications. Boredom would quickly set in, leading to carelessness, leading to mistakes. And even on your best days you wouldn't be producing answers very fast.Therefore, inventors have been search- ing for hundreds of years for a way to mechanize (that is, find a mechanism that can perform) this task [John Kop-
plin © 2002].
The abacus was an early aid for mathematical compu-
tations. Its only value is that it aids the memory of the hu- man performing the calculation. A skilled abacus operator can work on addition and subtraction problems at the speed of a person equipped with a hand calculator (multiplication and division are slower).The abacus is often wrongly attributed to China. In fact, the oldest surviving abacus was used in 300 B.C. by the Babylonians.
In 1617, an eccentric Scotsman named John Napier invented logarithms, which are a technology that allows multiplication to be performed via addition. The magic ingredient is the logarithm of each operand, which was originally ob- tained from a printed table. However, Napier also invented an alternative to tables,
where the logarithm values were carved on ivory sticks, which are now called Napier's Bones.
Napier's invention led directly to the slide rule, first built in England in 1632 and still in use in the 1960's by the NASA engineers of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo pro-
grams which landed men on the moon.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) made drawings of gear-driven calculating ma- chines but apparently never built any.
The first gear-driven calculating machine to actually be built was probably the calculating clock, so named by its in- ventor, the German professor Wilhelm Schickard in 1623. This device got little publicity because Schickard died soon afterward in the bubonic plague.
In 1642, Blaise Pascal, at age 19, invent-
ed the Pascaline as an aid for his father who
was a tax collector. Pascal built 50 of this
gear-driven one-function calculator (it could
only add) but could not sell many because of
their exorbitant cost and because they really
weren't that accurate (at that time it was not possible to fabricate gears with the re- quired precision). Up until the present age when car dashboards went digital, the odometer portion of a car's speedometer used the very same mechanism as the Pascaline to increment the next wheel after each full revolution of the prior wheel. Pascal was a child prodigy. At the age of 12, he was discovered doing his version of Euclid's thirty-second proposition on the kitchen floor. Pascal went on to invent probability theory, the hydraulic press, and the syringe.
Just a few years after Pascal, the German Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (co-inventor with Newton of calculus) managed to build a four-function (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) calculator that he called the stepped reckoner because, instead of gears, it employed fluted drums having ten flutes arranged around their cir- cumference in a stair-step fashion. Although the stepped reckoner employed the decimal number system (each drum had 10 flutes), Leibniz was the first to advocate use of the binary number system, which is fundamental to the operation of modern computers. Leibniz is considered one of the greatest of the philosophers but he died poor and alone.
In 1801, the Frenchman Joseph Marie Jacquard in- vented a power loom that could base its weave (and hence the design on the fabric) upon a pattern automatically read from punched wooden cards, held together in a long row by rope. Descendents of these punched cards have been in use ever since (remember the "hanging chad" from the Florida presidential ballots of the year 2000).
Jacquard's technology was a real boon (benefit) to mill owners, but put many loom operators out of work. Angry mobs smashed Jacquard looms and once attacked Jacquard himself.
History is full of examples of labor unrest following technological innovation yet most studies show that, overall, technology has actually increased the number of jobs.
By 1822, the English mathematician Charles Babbage was proposing a steam driven calculating machine the size of a room, which he called the Difference Engine. This machine would be able to compute tables of numbers, such as logarithm tables. He obtained government funding for this project due to the im- portance of numeric tables in ocean navigation. By promoting their commercial and military navies, the British government had managed to become the earth's greatest empire. Nevertheless, in
that time frame the British government was publishing a seven volume set of nav- igation tables which came with a companion volume of corrections which showed that the set had over 1000 numerical errors. It was hoped that Babbage's machine could eliminate errors in these types of tables. However, construction of Babbage's Difference Engine proved exceedingly difficult and the project soon became the most expensive government funded project up to that point in English history. Ten years later the device was still nowhere near complete, acrimony abounded be- tween all involved, and funding dried up. The device was never finished.
Babbage was not deterred, and by then was on to his next brainstorm, which he called the Analytic Engine. This device, large as a house and powered by 6 steam engines, would be more general purpose in nature because it would be pro- grammable, thanks to the punched card technology of Jacquard. But it was Bab- bage who made an important intellectual leap regarding the punched cards. In the Jacquard loom, the presence or absence of each hole in the card physically allows a colored thread to pass or stops that thread. Babbage saw that the pattern of holes could be used to represent an abstract idea such as a problem statement or the raw data required for that problem's solution. Furthermore, Babbage realized that punched paper could be employed as a storage mechanism, holding computed numbers for future reference. Because of the connection to the Jacquard loom,
  9
Babbage called the two main parts of his Analytic Engine the "Store" and the "Mill", as both terms are used in the weaving industry. The Store was where num- bers were held and the Mill was where they were "woven" into new results. In a modern computer these parts are called the memory unit and the CPU. The Ana- lytic Engine also had a key function that distinguishes computers from calculators: the conditional statement.
Babbage befriended Ada Byron, the daughter of the famous poet Lord By- ron. Though she was only 19, she was fascinated by Babbage's ideas and through letters and meetings with Babbage she learned enough about the design of the An- alytic Engine to begin fashioning programs for the still unbuilt machine. While Babbage refused to publish his knowledge for another 30 years, Ada wrote a series of "Notes" wherein she detailed sequences of instructions she had prepared for the Analytic Engine. The Analytic Engine remained unbuilt but Ada earned her spot in history as the first computer programmer. Ada invented the subroutine and was the first to recognize the importance of looping. Babbage himself went on to in- vent the modern postal system, cowcatchers on trains, and the ophthalmoscope, which is still used today to treat the eye.
The next breakthrough occurred in America. The U.S. Constitution states that a census should be taken of all U.S. citi- zens every 10 years in order to determine the representation of the states in Congress. While the very first census of 1790 had only required 9 months, by 1880 the U.S. population had grown so much that the count for the 1880 census took 7.5 years. Au- tomation was clearly needed for the next census. The census bu- reau offered a prize for an inventor to help with the 1890 census
and this prize was won by Herman Hollerith, who proposed and then successfully adopted Jacquard's punched cards for the purpose of computation.
Hollerith's invention, known as the Hollerith desk, consisted of a card reader which sensed the holes in the cards, a gear driven mechanism which could count, and a large wall of dial indicators to display the results of the count.
The patterns on Jacquard's cards were determined when a tapestry was de- signed and then were not changed. Today, we would call this a read-only form of information storage. Hollerith had the insight to convert punched cards to what is today called a read/write technology. While riding a train, he observed that the conductor didn't merely punch each ticket, but rather punched a particular pattern of holes whose positions indicated the approximate height, weight, eye color, etc. of the ticket owner. This was done to keep anyone else from picking up a discard- ed ticket and claiming it was his own. Hollerith realized how useful it would be to punch (write) new cards based upon an analysis (reading) of some other set of cards. Complicated analyses, too involved to be accomplished during a single pass through the cards, could be accomplished via multiple passes through the cards us- ing newly printed cards to remember the intermediate results. Unknown to Holler- ith, Babbage had proposed this long before.
 10

Hollerith's technique was successful and the 1890 census was completed in only 3 years at a savings of 5 million dollars.
Hollerith built a company, the Tabulating
Machine Company which, after a few buyouts,
eventually became International Business Ma-
chines, known today as IBM. IBM grew rapidly
and punched cards became ubiquitous. Your gas
bill would arrive each month with a punch card you had to return with your pay- ment. This punch card recorded the particulars of your account: your name, ad- dress, gas usage, etc.
Modern computing can probably be traced back to the 'Harvard Mk I' and Colossus. Colossus was an electronic com- puter built in Britain at the end 1943 and designed to crack the German coding system - Lorenz cipher. The 'Harvard Mk I' was a more general purpose electro-mechanical programmable computer built at Harvard University with backing from IBM.
These computers were among the first of the 'first generation' computers.
First generation computers were normally based around wired circuits con- taining vacuum valves and used punched cards as the main (non-volatile) storage medium. Another general purpose computer of this era was 'ENIAC' (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) which was completed in 1946. It was typical of first generation computers, it weighed 30 tones contained 18,000 electronic valves and consumed around 25KW of electrical power. It was, however, capable
of an amazing 100,000 calculations a second.
The next major step in the history of computing was the invention of the
transistor in 1947. This replaced the inefficient valves with a much smaller and more reliable component. Transistorized computers are normally referred to as 'Second Generation' and dominated the late 1950s and early 1960s. Despite using transistors and printed circuits these computers were still bulky and strictly the domain of Universities and governments.
The explosion in the use of computers began with 'Third Generation' com- puters. These relied Jack St. Claire Kilby's invention - the integrated circuit or mi- crochip; the first integrated circuit was produced in September 1958 but comput- ers using them didn't begin to appear until 1963. While large 'mainframes' such as the I.B.M. 360 increased storage and processing capabilities further, the integrated circuit allowed the development of Minicomputers that began to bring computing into many smaller businesses. Large scale integration of circuits led to the devel- opment of very small processing units, an early example of this is the processor used for analyising flight data in the US Navy's F14A `TomCat' fighter jet. This processor was developed by Steve Geller, Ray Holt and a team from AiResearch and American Microsystems.
On November 15th, 1971, Intel released the world's first commercial micro- processor, the 4004. Fourth generation computers were developed, using a micro-
  11

processor to locate much of the computer's processing abilities on a single (small) chip. Coupled with one of Intel's inventions - the RAM chip (Kilobits of memory on a single chip) - the microprocessor allowed fourth generation computers to be even smaller and faster than ever before. The 4004 was only capable of 60,000 in- structions per second, but later processors (such as the 8086 that all of Intel's pro- cessors for the IBM PC and compatibles are based) brought ever increasing speed and power to the computers. Supercomputers of the era were immensely powerful, like the Cray-1 which could calculate 150 million floating point operations per second. The microprocessor allowed the development of microcomputers, person- al computers that were small and cheap enough to be available to ordinary people. The first such personal computer was the MITS Altair 8800, released at the end of 1974, but it was followed by computers such as the Apple I & II, Commodore PET and eventually the original IBM PC in 1981.
Although processing power and storage capacities have increased beyond all recognition since the 1970s the underlying technology of LSI (large scale integra- tion) or VLSI (very large scale integration) microchips has remained basically the same, so it is widely regarded that most of today's computers still belong to the fourth generation.